[OSDOCS#18856]: Implemented manually restoring cquorum feature for 4.22 (#112828)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/installation-manual-recovering-when-auto-recovery-is-unavail.adoc

----
+
If fencing is required but is not functioning, ensure that the Redfish fencing endpoint is accessible and verify that the credentials are correct.
+

> If you have verified the failed node is permanently inaccessible but automated fencing cannot function, verify the failed node meets ALL of the following conditions:

Reviewer: Since this seems like its own action to do, I would recommend making this its own step:

```suggestion
.. If you have verified the failed node is permanently inaccessible but automated fencing cannot function, verify the failed node meets ALL of the following conditions:
```

Reviewer: Also, all caps is not really a supported means of showing emphasis in our docs, I would just write this out normally:

```suggestion
If you have verified the failed node is permanently inaccessible but automated fencing cannot function, verify the failed node meets all of the following conditions:
```

If the recovery is successful, no further action is required. If the issue persists, proceed to the next step.
--

. Recover from dual node power loss where both nodes are recoverable:
+

> This procedure applies when both control plane nodes lost power and both nodes can be restarted. If only one node can be restarted, proceed to step 4.

Reviewer: referring to a specific step is not recommended because what ends up being step 4 can change depending on future edits to this module. I would say "next step" instead:

```suggestion
This procedure applies when both control plane nodes lost power and both nodes can be restarted. If only one node can be restarted, proceed to the next step.
```

  master-1.ostest.test.metalkube.org: Offline

Daemon Status:
  corosync: active/enabled
  pacemaker: active/enabled
  pcsd: active/enabled
----
+
The PCSD status shows that the master-0 node is Online, and the other is offline.
BOTH nodes in the node list section are offline because neither has quorum.
+
[source,terminal]
----
[core@master-0 ~]$   sudo pcs quorum status --debug
Running: /usr/sbin/corosync-quorumtool -p
Environment:
  LC_ALL=C

Finished running: /usr/sbin/corosync-quorumtool -p
Return value: 2
--Debug Stdout Start--
Quorum information
------------------
Date:             Wed Apr 29 16:25:55 2026
Quorum provider:  corosync_votequorum
Nodes:            1
Node ID:          1
Ring ID:          1.e
Quorate:          No

Votequorum information
----------------------
Expected votes:   2
Highest expected: 2
Total votes:      1
Quorum:           1 Activity blocked
Flags:            2Node WaitForAll

Membership information
----------------------
    Nodeid      Votes    Qdevice Name
         1          1         NR master-0.ostest.test.metalkube.org (local)

--Debug Stdout End--
--Debug Stderr Start--

--Debug Stderr End--

Error: Unable to get quorum status:

> ----

Reviewer: this entire code block seems like its own separate command and its output. This section of the procedure needs to be changed to reflect that. I would consult with SME as to what this section is meant to show and use that as a basis for how to proceed with addressing this.

.. Verify that the failed node is permanently inaccessible before proceeding.
+

> Before confirming to Pacemaker that the failed node is fenced, you must ensure that the failed node meets ALL of the following conditions:

Reviewer: Same comment about capitalization:

```suggestion
Before confirming to Pacemaker that the failed node is fenced, you must ensure that the failed node meets all of the following conditions:
```

Reviewer: Please remove all other instances of using capitalization for emphasis from this PR

 - The node is powered off and cannot be restarted
 - The node cannot access any shared storage or cluster resources
 - The node is completely isolated from the cluster network
+

> If the failed node is accessible or can access shared resources, DO NOT proceed with this step. Confirming fencing for a node that is still active can cause data corruption and cluster failure.

Reviewer: Same thing about capitalization:

```suggestion
If the failed node is accessible or can access shared resources, do not proceed with this step. Confirming fencing for a node that is still active can cause data corruption and cluster failure.
```

.. Confirm to Pacemaker that the failed node is fenced by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo pcs quorum unblock
----
+
The command shows the following sample output:
+
[source,terminal]
----
WARNING: If node 'master-1' is not powered off or it does have access to shared resources, data corruption and/or cluster failure may occur
Type 'yes' or 'y' to proceed, anything else to cancel:
----
+

> Replace <failed_node_name> with the name of the failed control plane node (for example, control-plane-1).

Reviewer: Two things here. For one, the user replaced value and the example value must be in backticks:

```suggestion
Replace `<failed_node_name>` with the name of the failed control plane node (for example, `control-plane-1`).
```

Another issue is, what does this refer to? I don't see <failed_node_name> used in the command for this step. Please figure out what to do with this statement, whether that's to delete it or to adjust a code block accordingly. If this is referring to the node name in the example output above, I would rewrite it like this:

```suggestion
In this example output, `master-1` is the name of the failed control plane node.
```

.. Verify that quorum is restored by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo pcs quorum status
----
+
The command shows the following sample output:
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
Quorum information
------------------
Date:             Fri Oct  3 14:15:31 2025
Quorum provider:  corosync_votequorum
Nodes:            1
Node ID:          1
Ring ID:          1.16
Quorate:          Yes

Votequorum information
----------------------
Expected votes:   2
Highest expected: 2
Total votes:      1
Quorum:           1
Flags:            2Node Quorate
----

.. Wait 30 seconds for Pacemaker to process the fencing confirmation and begin recovery.

.. Verify that etcd is running on the surviving node by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo pcs resource status etcd
----

> +
> If etcd is not running, restart it by running the following command:

Reviewer: This should be its own step:

```suggestion

.. If etcd is not running, restart it by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo pcs resource cleanup etcd
----

> +
> Wait up to 5 minutes for etcd to start. Check the status periodically by running the following command:

Reviewer: This should be its own step:

```suggestion

.. Wait up to 5 minutes for etcd to start. Check the status periodically by running the following command:
```

Even if all of these commands and actions are closely related to each other, [per the ISG](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=format-procedures#writing-steps) you should write a step for each significant user action. In this case, you are running commands in sequence (not all at once), which I think counts as their own significant actions.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo pcs resource status etcd
----
+
The command shows that the `podman-etcd` resource is started.

> If the container is started successfully, you can see the logs by running the following command:
> +
> [source,terminal]
> ----
> $ sudo podman logs etcd
> ----
> +
> If the container is not started, you can see the logs by running the following command:

Reviewer: I would make both of these their own steps as well. And because the [ISG](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=format-procedures#writing-steps:~:text=Use%20imperative%20mood%20in%20the%20first%20sentence%20of%20each%20step.) requires use to write steps in the imperative form, you should tell users to run the command instead of saying that they "can" run the command:

```suggestion

.. If the container is started successfully, view the logs by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo podman logs etcd
----

.. If the container is not started, view the logs by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ journalctl -u pacemaker | grep podman-etcd
----
+
The relevant logs are placed at `/var/log/paceamaker/pacemaker.log`.
The output must show that etcd is started on the surviving node.
+
After restoring corosync quorum and confirming etcd is running, proceed to step 5 to replace the failed control plane node.

. If you need to manually recover from an event when one of the nodes is not recoverable, follow the procedure in "Replacing control plane nodes in a two-node OpenShift cluster".
+
When a cluster loses a single node, it enters degraded mode. In this state, Pacemaker automatically unblocks quorum and allows the cluster to temporarily operate on the remaining node.
+
If both nodes fail and both can be restarted, Pacemaker reestablishes quorum automatically when both nodes are online.
+

> If only one node can be restarted, proceed to step 4 to restore corosync quorum manually.

Reviewer: This is also an instance where we shouldn't refer to a step by its number. In this case, maybe you can say "previous step", but the fact that we are telling users to go backwards within a procedure is less than ideal.

This might be out of scope to this feature, but is there any other way to organize this procedure? This seems like 5 procedures packed into one. Can each of these steps be made into their own procedure modules?
